Granular Consent updates (#3234)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/guides/request-user-consent/main/index.md

---

## About the user consent dialog

> When configured, the Okta-hosted user consent dialog for OAuth 2.0 or OpenID Connect authentication flows allows users to acknowledge and accept that they are giving an app access to some of their data. With the correct configuration, Okta displays a consent dialog that shows which app is asking for access to what data. The dialog displays the app logo that you specify and also provides details about what data is shared if the user consents.

Reviewer: NIT: logo that you specify or logo that you can specify?

Author: that you specify. It's describing what a completed dialog looks like.

## User consent and tokens

User consent represents a user's explicit permission to allow an application to access resources protected by scopes. Consent grants are different from tokens because a consent can outlast a token, and there can be multiple tokens with varying sets of scopes derived from a single consent.

You can configure which scopes aren't required, which are optional, and which are required.

When an application needs to get a new access token from an authorization server, the user isn't prompted for consent if they already consented to the specified scopes. Consent grants remain valid until the user or admin manually revokes them, or until the user, application, authorization server, or scope is deactivated or deleted.

> > **Note:** The user only has to grant consent once for an attribute per authorization server.

Reviewer: **Note:** The user only has to grant consent once for an attribute per authorization server for an application.

Author: We were just talking about the application in the sentence above. We don't need to add "for an application" to the end, do we?

> > **Note:** The user only has to grant consent once for an attribute per authorization server.

Author: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The user only has to grant consent once for a scope per authorization server.
```

* `consent`: a scope property listed in the **Parameter details** [section](/docs/reference/api/oidc/#parameter-details) for the `/authorize` endpoint. This property allows you to enable or disable user consent for an individual scope.

## Enable consent for scopes

Use the following steps to display the user consent dialog as part of an OpenID Connect or OAuth 2.0 request.

> **Note:** Currently OAuth Consent works only with custom authorization servers. See [Authorization Servers](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/) for more information on the types of authorization servers available to you and what you can use them for.

<ApiAmProdWarning />

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Applications** > **Applications**.
1. Select the OpenID Connect app that you want to require user consent for.
1. On the **General** tab, scroll down to the **User Consent** section and verify that the **Require consent** checkbox is selected. If it isn't, click **Edit** and select **Require consent**.

>     > **Note:** If the **User Consent** section doesn't appear, you don't have the API Access Management and the User Consent features enabled. To enable these features, contact [Support](https://support.okta.com/help/open_case?_).

Reviewer: There is a white space in the contact hyperlink.

Author: Where?

    * **Implicit**: The default setting. Indicates that the user doesn't have to grant the app access to the information. User consent is implied.
    * **Optional**: Indicates that the user can skip granting the app access to the information (scope). The scope is excluded from the authorization request. If a user skips this scope, the next time that they sign in, Okta doesn't prompt them for the skipped scope. If you later make the scope required for the app, include `prompt=consent` in the request, and the user is prompted to grant the app access to that scope.

    > **Note:** When you include `prompt=consent` in the authorization request, the user is prompted for all consent enabled scopes. This includes scopes that are required and optional, even if the user has already given consent.

1. When you select **User consent** as **Required** or **Optional**, the **Block services from requesting this scope** checkbox is automatically selected.

>     The **Block services from requesting this scope** checkbox strictly enforces user consent for the scope. When you select this checkbox, if a service using the [Client Credentials](/docs/guides/implement-grant-type/clientcreds/main/) grant flow makes a request that contains this scope, the authorization server returns an error. This occurs because there is no user involved in a Client Credentials grant flow. If you want to allow service-to-service interactions to request this scope, clear the checkbox. See the [Authorization Servers API](/docs/reference/api/authorization-servers/#scope-properties) for more information on consent options.

Reviewer: @nakuljoshi-okta @franklu-okta I assume this setting does not apply to Token exchange flow. If any type of consent is enabled (irrespective of block services setting) - it will throw an error. Is that correct?

Reviewer 2: correct

1. On the **Authorization Servers** tab, select **default** (custom authorization server) in the table. In this example, we are enabling consent for a default custom authorization server scope.
1. Select the **Scopes** tab.
1. Click the edit icon for the **phone** scope. The Edit Scope dialog appears.
1. For this use case example, select **Required** in the **User consent** section. **Required** indicates that the user must grant the app access to the information (scope) or they can't sign in to the app. The other options available include:

    * **Implicit**: The default setting. Indicates that the user doesn't have to grant the app access to the information. User consent is implied.
    * **Optional**: Indicates that the user can skip granting the app access to the information (scope). Scopes that the user skips aren't included in the authorization response. After a user skips a scope, the next time that they sign in, Okta doesn't prompt them for it. If you later make the scope required for the app, the user is then prompted to grant the app access to that scope.

>     > **Note:** When you include `prompt=consent` in the authorization request, the user is prompted for all consent-enabled scopes. This includes scopes that are required or optional, even when the user has already given consent or skipped a scope. Additionally, when previously required scopes appear in the dialog, the user has the option to then skip those scopes.

Reviewer 3: By `previously required scopes` do you mean they were previously required, but now made optional. I'm not sure if that text conveys the information with clarity.
You can say `previously required scopes which are made optional`

              "client_id": "0oaosna3ilNxgPTmk0h7",
             "token_endpoint_auth_method": "client_secret_basic"
            }
     },
     "settings": {
         "app": {},
         "notifications": {
             "vpn": {
                 "network": {
                     "connection": "DISABLED"
                  },
                 "message": null,
                 "helpUrl": null
             }
            },
         "oauthClient": {
             "client_uri": null,
             "logo_uri": null,
             "redirect_uris": [
                "https://{yourOktaDomain}/authorization-code/callback"
             ],
             "response_types": [
                 "code",
                 "token",
                 "id_token"
             ],
             "grant_types": [
                 "authorization_code",
                 "implicit"
             ],
                "initiate_login_uri": "https://{yourOktaDomain}/authorization-code/callback",
                "application_type": "web",
                 "consent_method": "REQUIRED",
                 "issuer_mode": "CUSTOM_URL"
            }
        }
    }
    ```

### Update Scope consent

> To enable consent for a scope, you need to [update the appropriate scope](/docs/reference/api/authorization-servers/#update-a-scope) by updating the `consent` property for the scope from `IMPLICIT` (the default) to `REQUIRED`, `FLEXIBLE` or `OPTIONAL`. In this example, set `consent` to `REQUIRED`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable consent for a scope, you need to [update the appropriate scope](/docs/reference/api/authorization-servers/#update-a-scope) by updating the `consent` property for the scope from `IMPLICIT` (the default) to either `REQUIRED` or `FLEXIBLE` and setting the `optional` parameter to true (to make it optional). In this example, set `consent` to `REQUIRED`.
```

                  },
                 "message": null,
                 "helpUrl": null
             }
            },
         "oauthClient": {
             "client_uri": null,
             "logo_uri": null,
             "redirect_uris": [
                "https://{yourOktaDomain}/authorization-code/callback"
             ],
             "response_types": [
                 "code",
                 "token",
                 "id_token"
             ],
             "grant_types": [
                 "authorization_code",
                 "implicit"
             ],
                "initiate_login_uri": "https://{yourOktaDomain}/authorization-code/callback",
                "application_type": "web",
                 "consent_method": "REQUIRED",
                 "issuer_mode": "CUSTOM_URL"
            }
        }
    }
    ```

### Update Scope consent

To enable consent for a scope, you need to [update the appropriate scope](/docs/reference/api/authorization-servers/#update-a-scope) by updating the `consent` property for the scope from `IMPLICIT` (the default) to either `REQUIRED` or `FLEXIBLE`. In this example, set `consent` to `REQUIRED`.

> To make consent of a scope optional, set the `consent` property to `REQUIRED` and include `"optional": true` <ApiLifecycle access="ea" /> in the request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To make consent of a scope optional, set the `consent` property to either `REQUIRED` or `FLEXIBLE` and include `"optional": true` <ApiLifecycle access="ea" /> in the request.
```

}
```

### Update Scope consent

> To enable consent for a scope, you need to [update the appropriate scope](/docs/reference/api/authorization-servers/#update-a-scope) by updating the `consent` property for the scope from `IMPLICIT` (the default) to `REQUIRED`. You can also set the `consent` property for the scope to `FLEXIBLE` or `OPTIONAL`. See the [Authorization Servers API](/docs/reference/api/authorization-servers/#scope-properties).

Reviewer 3: You can set the `consent` property for the scope to IMPLICIT, REQUIRED or FLEXIBLE
To make a scope optional, one needs to include new field in the request "optional" : true,
example
```
{
    "consent": "REQUIRED",
    "optional" : true,
    "metadataPublish": "NO_CLIENTS",
    "name": "tst1",
    "displayName": "as2-scp6",
    "description": "as2-scp6 desc"
}
```

Reviewer 3: you can see the mapping here
https://oktawiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/eng/pages/2498241876/Technical+Design+for+Granular+Consent+Eng+1-Pager#Database-saasure_prod

}
```

<ApiLifecycle access="ea" />
To update scope consent to `OPTIONAL`, set `consent` to `REQUIRED` and include the `optional` parameter set to `true`:

```json
{
    "id": "scpixa2zmc8Eumvjb0h7",
    "name": "phone",
    "displayName": "phone",
    "description": "Allows this application to access your phone number.",
    "system": true,
    "metadataPublish": "ALL_CLIENTS",
    "consent": "REQUIRED",
    "optional": true,
    "default": false
}
```

## Build the request

After you define the scopes that you want to require consent for, prepare an authentication or authorization request with the correct values.

1. Obtain the following values from your OpenID Connect application, both of which you can find on the application's **General** tab:

    * Client ID
    * Redirect URI

2. Use the default custom authorization server's authorization endpoint:

>     > **Note:** See [Authorization servers](/docs/guides/customize-authz-server/overview/) for more information on the types of authorization servers available to you and what you can use them for.

Reviewer 4: I'd move the **Note:** underneath the endpoint, which allows you to remove some of the verbiage that currently comes after, ie., "A default custom authorization endpoint looks like this ..." The Step action takes care of that info. If you think it necessary, you can leave in the detail that `default` replaces `${authorizationServerId}` in the endpoint. Hope this makes sense.

    A default custom authorization endpoint looks like this where the `${authorizationServerId}` is `default`: `https://{yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default/v1/authorize`

3. Add the following query parameters to the URL:

    * Your OpenID Connect application's `client_id` and `redirect_uri`
    * The `openid` scope and the scopes that you want to require consent for. In this example, we configured the `phone` scope in the previous section.
    * The response type, which for an ID token is `id_token` and an access token is `token`

    > **Note:** The examples in this guide use the [Implicit flow](/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/#implicit-flow), which streamlines authentication by returning tokens without introducing additional steps. This makes it easier to test your configuration. For the [Authorization Code flow](/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/#authorization-code-flow), the response type is `code`. You can then exchange an authorization code for an ID token and/or an access token using the `/token` endpoint.

    * Values for `state` and `nonce`, which can be anything

>     * Optional. The `prompt` parameter. The standard behavior (if you don't include `prompt` in the request) is to prompt the user for consent if they haven't already given consent for the scope(s). When you include `prompt=consent` in the request, the user is prompted for consent every time, even if they have already given consent. You must set the `consent_method` and the consent for the scope(s) to `REQUIRED`. See the [**Parameter details**](/docs/reference/api/oidc/#parameter-details) section for the `/authorize` endpoint for more information on the supported values for the `prompt` parameter.

Reviewer 4: I don't think **Parameter Details** needs to be in bold. (We could also probably drop "...for more information on the supported values for the `prompt` parameter", but I'll leave that up to you.

>     * Optional. The `prompt` parameter. The standard behavior (if you don't include `prompt` in the request) is to prompt the user for consent if they haven't already given consent for the scope(s). When you include `prompt=consent` in the request, the user is prompted for consent every time, even if they have already given consent. You must set the `consent_method` and the consent for the scope(s) to `REQUIRED`. See the [**Parameter details**](/docs/reference/api/oidc/#parameter-details) section for the `/authorize` endpoint for more information on the supported values for the `prompt` parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
    * Optional. The `prompt` parameter. The standard behavior (if you don't include `prompt` in the request) is to prompt the user for consent if they haven't already given consent for the scope(s). When you include `prompt=consent` in the request, the user is prompted for consent every time, even if they have already given consent. You must set the `consent_method` and the consent for the scope(s) to `REQUIRED`. See the [Parameter details](/docs/reference/api/oidc/#parameter-details) section for the `/authorize` endpoint.
```

"https://${yourOktaDomain}/api/v1/users/${userId}/grants"
```

> **Note:** See [Revoke all Grants for a User](/docs/reference/api/users/#revoke-all-grants-for-a-user).

> 

Reviewer 4: See Troubleshooting section below: remove the `/grants` endpoint from the URL link.
